ABSTRACT: Arrhythmia identification from electrocardiograms through deep learning is a proven method for atrial fibrillation (AF) diagnosis. However, screening methods for AF are ineffective: the diagnostic yield of a single electrocardiogram (ECG) is low, and current prolonged monitoring methods are incommodious, and though common, AF can go misdiagnosed, and result in a greater risk for stroke, cardiac arrest, and death. Additionally, few convolutional neural networks (CNNs) classify by rhythm type, and those that have were not as accurate or used unrealistic datasets. CNN arrhythmia classification via ECG can offer more accurate and effective diagnostic procedures. Our study aimed to create and evaluate the effectiveness of a one-dimensional CNN (1D-CNN) that automatically detects and identifies AF from short-term ECG recordings out of a dataset including various arrhythmias, AF, and normal sinus rhythm from the MIT-BIH Arrhythmia Database. ECG data underwent preprocessing and segmentation, and was split into training and testing sets conducted with 5-fold cross-validation. The 1D-CNN 8-layer model was developed and evaluated with several performance metrics, resulting in high accuracy, precision, recall, specificity, and F1 score: 98.89%, 99.34%, 97.66%, 99.62%, and 98.50%, respectively, indicating its efficacy. Further research in classifying multiple arrhythmias or certain symptoms, utilizing additional metrics, and other resampling procedures may provide even more effective methods of diagnosis. Overall, the findings of this study, in tandem with previous research, could work to advance diagnostic procedures of arrhythmias through the use of deep learning for ECG analysis.
